---
layout:     post
title:      "CopperheadOS Alpha"
subtitle:   "Alpha is now available for the Nexus 5 and Samsung Galaxy S4"
date:       2015-08-21 12:00:00
author:     "Daniel Micay"
header-img: "backgrounds/alpha.png"
header-pos: "top center"
published:  true
priority:   0.1
---


The alpha release of CopperheadOS is now available, with support for the Nexus
5 and Samsung Galaxy S4. It's currently based on the CyanogenMod 12.1 branch
(Android 5.1.1). The ROMs are tested before being pushed out as over-the-air
updates so you can expect more reliability than the automated CyanogenMod 12.1
nightlies.

The previous four blog posts provide a good overview of the changes, although
most of the smaller features are not covered and more work has been done since
these posts:

* [The State of ASLR on Android Lollipop](/blog/2015/05/11/aslr-android-zygote)
* [Integrating PaX into Android](/blog/2015/06/11/android-pax)
* [Separating Android's encryption and lockscreen passwords](/blog/2015/07/08/android-encryption-password)
* [Hardening Android's Bionic libc](/blog/2015/07/27/hardening-bionic)

The site will have a full feature list soon, along with a list of the changes
upstreamed into the Android Open Source Project.

## Pre-built ROMs

Note that if you get stuck with these instructions, you can just follow any
other instructions for installing CyanogenMod. Nothing about the process is
different for CopperheadOS.

## Installing the ROM

### Recovery

Before installing the ROM, you'll need to replace the recovery image. For now,
Team Win Recovery Project is the recommended option.

In the future, we'll only recommend using the CopperheadOS recovery image as it
can be updated via over-the-air updates and provides signature validation. The
CyanogenMod recovery project it's built from has buggy support for sideloading
so it's not a great option right now. It is unable to sideload at all on the
Galaxy S4 and it often fails to start on the Nexus 5 so it requires more than
one attempt. Everything else does work fine as it comes from AOSP.

### Nexus 5

The ROM zip file can be downloaded from the [builds
page](/android/downloads?device=hammerhead).

1. Boot into the bootloader. You can do this by turning off the device and then
turning it on by holding both the Volume Down and Power buttons. Alternatively,
you can use `adb reboot bootloader`.
2. Wipe the data partition and unlock the bootloader with `fastboot oem
unlock`.
3. Flash a recovery with `fastboot flash recovery recovery.img`.
4. (OPTIONAL) If you're using our recovery image, you can relock the bootloader
with `fastboot oem lock`. This will prevent it from being flashed via fastboot
without wiping the data again. Note that this doesn't provide any real value
once encryption is enabled.
5. Reboot into recovery from the bootloader.
6. Tell the recovery to sideload a zip file (Advanced -> ADB sideload in TWRP,
Apply update -> ADB sideload in our recovery image).
7. Run `adb sideload rom.zip`.
8. Reboot in CopperheadOS from recovery.
9. Don't enable encryption until a lockscreen password has been set, and don't
remove the lockscreen password if you haven't set a separate encryption
password. CyanogenMod currently doesn't support encryption with the internal
default password.

### Samsung Galaxy S4

The ROM zip file can be downloaded from the [builds
page](/android/downloads?device=jfltexx).

1. Boot into download mode. You can do this by turning off the device and then
turning it on by holding the Volume Down, Home and Power buttons together.
Alternatively, you can use `adb reboot download`.
2. Flash a recovery image with `heimdall flash --RECOVERY recovery.img
--no-reboot`.
3. Manually power off once it's finished and hold Volume Up + Home + Power to
boot into the recovery. Otherwise you'll have to start over as the OS will
clobber the recovery image.
4. Tell the recovery to sideload a zip file (Advanced -> ADB sideload in TWRP,
Apply update -> ADB sideload in our recovery image).
5. Run `adb sideload rom.zip`.
6. Reboot in CopperheadOS from recovery.
7. Don't enable encryption until a lockscreen password has been set, and don't
remove the lockscreen password if you haven't set a separate encryption
password. CyanogenMod currently doesn't support encryption with the internal
default password.

### Google Play Services / Store

CopperheadOS is compatible with Google Play. One of the CyanogenMod developers
maintains [a repository on
GitHub](https://github.com/cgapps/vendor_google/blob/builds/README.md) with zip
files to sideload after the initial installation.

Note that the F-Droid app store is included by default and may have apps
covering all of your needs. The default repository provides only entirely open
source applications and has warnings for those with misfeatures like user
tracking.

## Reporting bugs

Bugs (or feature requests) should be reported to [the issue tracker on the main
repository](https://github.com/copperhead/android/issues). The other
repositories all have the issue trackers disabled to keep things manageable.

At this stage, we're not going to be actively fixing bugs in AOSP or
CyanogenMod.

### PaX exceptions

Many apps need exceptions from the MPROTECT feature, mostly due to the
JavaScript JIT compiler in the WebView widget. If you run into any issues, you
can try turning on PaX's soft mode (i.e. userspace hardening features disabled)
via the Settings -> Developer options -> PaX soft mode toggle. You need to
enable the hidden Developer options menu by repeatedly touching the 'Build
number' menu entry in Settings -> About phone.

If you do encounter an app requiring an exception, please report it to us so we
can add it to the exception database. It would help us if you confirmed that
toggling on soft mode resolves the issue, along with providing the relevant
portion of the debug logs (`adb logcat`) for the crash.

The long-term plan is to address the most common issues like the WebView via
automated checks in the package manager. For now, even the most common issues
need to be dealt with via the internal exception database. Thankfully, Android
dropped text relocations on 64-bit and is in the process of killing them off on
32-bit so one of the most common problems is already being solved.

## Building from source

CopperheadOS can be built with the same process as AOSP and CyanogenMod. The
only significant difference is the integration of ROM signing into the build
process to make it easier for users to sign their own builds. Replacing the
default public AOSP test keys is highly recommend as Android's security model
is based around the private keys actually being private.

### Prerequisites

Building it has only been tested on Linux, but it *should* be possible to build
it on OS X too. For more details on setting up a build environment with the
required dependencies, see the [Android
documentation](https://source.android.com/source/initializing.html) on this.

Downloading the sources requires upwards of 20GiB of bandwidth and the size of
the source tree + build tree for one device will be ~50GiB. The minimum memory
requirement is somewhere near 8GiB. A finished build (i.e. the ROM zip) is only
~250M.

### Build

Android's source tree consists of hundreds of Git repositories, so it uses a
meta-tool called Repo to make sense of it. Download the Repo tool from Google
and put it in a directory in your `$PATH`:

~~~
curl https://storage.googleapis.com/git-repo-downloads/repo > ~/.local/bin/repo
chmod +x ~/.local/bin/repo
export PATH="$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin"
~~~

Create a directory for the source tree and initialize it from Copperhead's main
android repository:

~~~
mkdir ~/copperheados
cd ~/copperheados
repo init -u https://github.com/copperhead/android.git -b cm-12.1
~~~

Next, sync the repositories:

~~~
repo sync -j16
~~~

In either Bash or Zsh, set up the build environment by sourcing envsetup.sh:

~~~
source build/envsetup.sh
~~~

The environment then needs to be set up for the target device. Note that the
same source tree can be reused for multiple target devices.

For the Nexus 5:

~~~
breakfast hammerhead
~~~

For the Samsung Galaxy S4:

~~~
breakfast jfltexx
~~~

You should now generate your own signing keys to avoid the public AOSP test
keys:

~~~
mkdir ~/copperheados-signing-keys
cd ~/copperheados-signing-keys
~/copperheados/development/tools/make_key platform '/C=CA/ST=Ontario/L=Toronto/'
~/copperheados/development/tools/make_key media '/C=CA/ST=Ontario/L=Toronto/'
~/copperheados/development/tools/make_key shared '/C=CA/ST=Ontario/L=Toronto/'
~/copperheados/development/tools/make_key releasekey '/C=CA/ST=Ontario/L=Toronto/'
~~~

The following environment variables need to be set to use the keys:

~~~
export OTA_PACKAGE_SIGNING_KEY=~/copperheados-signing-keys/releasekey
export SIGNING_KEY_DIR=~/copperheados-signing-keys
~~~

Note that `OTA_PACKAGE_SIGNING_KEY` is a convenience feature from CyanogenMod
and `SIGNING_KEY_DIR` is another convenience added by CopperheadOS. You would
normally have to sign by hand after building.

At this point, the device-specific proprietary libraries need to be obtained
from the relevant device. You can do this by flashing a CyanogenMod 12.1 ROM
onto the device and running their `extract-files.sh` script. There are other
sources for these files, but CyanogenMod is likely the most trustworthy one.

For the Nexus 5:

~~~
device/lge/hammerhead/extract-files.sh
~~~

For the Samsung Galaxy S4:

~~~
device/samsung/jfltexx/extract-files.sh
~~~

Finally, run the build process for the target device.

For the Nexus 5:

~~~
brunch hammerhead
~~~

For the Samsung Galaxy S4:

~~~
brunch jfltexx
~~~

Assuming it succeeds, the ROM zip file will be placed in directory set by the
scripts in your shell's `$OUT` environment variable. The build process gives
the zip file a name based on the date and another based on the build id. These
are hard links to the same file and either can be used for either sideloading
or over-the-air updates.

You can also flash the recovery.img (see above) to have a recovery with support
for validating that any zip it installs is correctly signed with your key. The
official CopperheadOS recovery won't work, since it expects *our* key.

## Development model

If you're contributing or just building from source, you should keep in mind
that the project is currently being developed in a strictly downstream model.
All of the repositories are being regularly rebased onto the upstream
CyanogenMod branches along with commits being reordered / rewritten to prepare
work for submission to AOSP. This makes the project significantly easier to
maintain, audit and port to new versions of Android, but it will make life very
painful for anyone with clones. This will be changed if there are actually a
significant amount of outside contributions coming in, which seems unlikely.
The history is temporary even with merges used in place of rebases because the
CyanogenMod branches are based on independent AOSP stable branches.

The Repo tool will happily clobber repositories in the source tree when they're
rebased, but it doesn't like updates for the main android.git repository. If
you don't want the download the sources again, you can rewind the history in
`.repo/manifests` to a known good commit with `git reset --hard` and then sync.

I recommend contributing bug fixes and clear cut security improvements directly
to AOSP or CyanogenMod as we'll benefit from anything implemented there. It
makes sense to contribute directly if upstream isn't responsive and we may also
want to backport changes. CopperheadOS targets a different niche so it will
also be willing to make significant (but not extreme) sacrifices to improve
security. For example, it uses OpenBSD malloc but it's not going to pay the
enormous performance cost of something like Address Sanitizer. PaX's MPROTECT
feature is a borderline reasonable compatibility sacrifice (especially since
soft mode can be toggled on) but requiring other new permissions and managing
exception databases for those too would be going too far.
