---
layout:     post
title:      "CopperheadOS Beta"
subtitle:   "Beta is now available for the Nexus 5, Nexus 9 and Nexus 5X"
date:       2016-02-08 12:00:00
author:     "Daniel Micay"
header-img: "backgrounds/alpha.png"
header-pos: "top center"
published:  true
priority:   1.0
---

CopperheadOS has made a lot of progress towards a production quality hardened
Android operating system. The project is now in the Beta phase. See the [high
level overview](/android/) for basic details about the operating system and the
[technical overview](/android/docs/technical_overview) for a more in-depth
description of most of the features. There's now an [official installation
guide](/android/docs/install) along with an initial attempt at [build
instructions](/android/docs/building) without full coverage of setting up a
build environment. GPG signatures have been added for the [factory
images](/android/downloads) since they aren't inherently signed with automatic
verification like the update zips.

Progress towards a stable release can be followed via the [Release milestone on
the issue tracker](https://github.com/copperhead/bugtracker/milestones). The
completed Beta milestone shows which blocking issues were fixed to reach this
point. In addition to the blocking issues, many of the security features were
improved and new features were implemented. The features identified various
Android bugs which were narrowed down and fixed. In many cases, the bugs were
already fixed in Android's master branch and fixes that were not included in
the monthly updates from Google simply had to be backported.

Since Alpha, CopperheadOS moved away from using CyanogenMod as the base for the
operating system. It's now directly based on the latest stable release of the
Android Open Source Project. CyanogenMod was originally chosen as the basis for
CopperheadOS to leverage the broad hardware support. However, it proved to be
the antithesis of the project's goals and it has lackluster support for devices
outside of the Nexus line. CyanogenMod is a testing ground for new features and
is perpetually broken in all kinds of new and exciting ways. It lacks a focus
on security and AOSP has much better code review and higher standards for code
quality. Support for devices outside of the Nexus line tends to be quite broken
with no guarantees of continued support and the lack of monthly security
updates from the vendors is a dealbreaker due to device specific proprietary
components. The drastic changes and broad device support in CyanogenMod also
hold back new version upgrades for months. AOSP provides a robust, stable base
with predictable support and security updates.

Due to dropping CyanogenMod, support for devices outside of the Nexus line
became impractical so Samsung Galaxy S4 support was dropped. Support for the
Nexus 9 and Nexus 5X was added and supporting the Nexus 6 and Nexus 6P will
happen at some point down the road.

Releases will start being tagged in the repositories at some point before the
stable release in order to move towards reproducible builds and to provide a
history of the changes without getting in the way of keeping the changes ready
for upstreaming and porting to new versions of Android via rebasing. Since
CopperheadOS is based on Android's stable branches, there's no long-term
development branch. That leaves little incentive to preserve the history for a
year, which would get in the way due to the need to extract the changes as
standalone patches.

CopperheadOS is well on the way to stable release, but it needs your support to
get there. Bug reports, ideas for security improvements, patches and donations
are all highly appreciated.
